New since v0.9.x:
+ Added support for [[Collapsing Sections]]. Headers, lists, code, math, and front matter can all be collapsed. Collapsed state is kept persistent between sessions.
+ Added an option to automatically collapse [[Front Matter]].
+ [PR 206 by Sevoris](https://github.com/suchnsuch/Tangent/pull/206): Made the [[Creation Rules|Creation Rule]] name template tokens clickable buttons for easier editing. 
+ Added the `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Shift+K` shortcut for inserting wiki links with the selected text as the display text.
+ Added support for adding links from the context menu.
+ Exposed formatting toggles from the context menu.
+ Added support for linking directly to header id links in markdown links.
+ Added support for restoring selection & scroll position in notes between sessions.
+ Added support for searching for and navigating to headers from the `Cmd/Ctrl+O` search menu.
+ Made tag search not relative to the last name item, better matching user intuition. 
+ Updated to Electron 37.
- Fixed an issue where the note editor fallback feature wasn't correctly invoked.
- Fixed an issue where link data could be incorrect after editing links.
- Fixed an issue where closing inline formatting at the end of a link broke link parsing.
- Fixed several issues with selection & annotation initialization when opening notes.

New since beta 2:
- Fixed an issue where commands couldn't collapse sections for notes in the [[Feed Lens]].
- Fixed a regression where default elements couldn't be opened from the [[Command Palette]]