New since v0.10:
+ Added support for displaying and embedding local video, audio, and pdf files.
+ Added support for displaying [[Mermaid Diagrams]] inside of [[Code]] blocks.
+ Added the ability to customize keyboard shortcuts throughout Tangent.
+ Added support for checked & enabled status for note formatting commands.
+ Added tooltips for files in the sidebar.
+ Added a "copy section" button to the line gutter. Code, math, and front-matter blocks copy their contents. Hold "Shift" to copy surrounding markdown syntax.
+ Added support for copying local `.png` & `.jpeg` files directly to the clipboard.
+ Added support for navigating the sidebar with keyboard keys and invoking "rename" via a shortcut.
+ Added support for custom shortcuts for [[Creation Rules]].
+ Updated the icon for macOS Tahoe.
+ Added support for specifying a folder over a note with a trailing `/`.
+ Added support for nested & escaped brackets `[]` in markdown links.
+ Added support for autocompleting `...` to `…` (ellipses).
+ Mirrored the name of the note in the note settings pane for consistency.
+ Improved the readability and reliability of YAML parsing errors.
- Fixed an issue where parsing could crash from YAML that parsed but could not be translated to a JS object.
- Fixed an issue where link preview cards lacked all style in production.
- Fixed an issue where directory-based search matches could be prioritized over direct filename matches.
- Fixed an issue where the YouTube embedder rejected Tangent's requests due to a missing "referrer" header.
- Fixed an issue where the accent color hue could not be set to the full 360° hue space.
- Fixed an issue where the settings panel for a pane could remain open even when your mouse leaves the panel.
- Fixed an issue where long note titles wrapped in the vertical toolbar.

New since beta 4:
+ Displayed the shortcuts for [[Creation Rules]] in the "New Note" dropdown menu.