+ Made the Details Panel universal across all views, making backlinks accessible anywhere.
+ Added keyboard navigation in the pane settings, with a `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Up` shortcut for opening the settings panel in the current pane.
+ Added keyboard navigation to the [[Feed Lens|Feed]], [[Cards Lens|Cards]], and [[List Lens|List Lenses]].
+ Enabled the "Move to Left Note" `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Left` shortcut to move keyboard focus to [[The Sidebar]]. Pressing `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Right` while focus is in the sidebar will return focus to the leftmost pane.
+ Made the floating "Create" button universal across the Folder, Feed, & List Lenses.
+ The `-` and `*` list characters are now treated as different kinds. Swapping between them in a list will propagate that change to all lower siblings.
+ Added support for list glyphs to automatically change as you indent. This can be disabled in the note settings.
+ Sentence focus will highlight the previous sentence if the cursor is within trailing whitespace of a line. This leaves the last sentence highlighted when you haven't yet started a new one.
+ Added support for ISO week numbers in [[Creation Rules|Creation Rule]] name templates.
+ Added `.webp` image files to the image allow list.
+ Added a setting to disable auto-updates.
+ Updated to Electron 40 and Svelte 5.
- Fixed an issue where thousands of in-note-search results could cause dramatic performance issues by limiting the number of rendered annotations.
- Fixed RTL language issues for tags, inline math, lists, and unchecked checkboxes (more work here pending).