New since v0.11
+ The Details Panel is universal across all views, making backlinks accessible anywhere.
+ Added several improvements to [[Creation Rules]]:
	+ Creation Rules now support [[Creation Rules#Content Template|Content Templates]]. Template tokens are highlighted within notes, and include explanatory tooltips and autocomplete.
	+ Creation rules of parent folders will show up in the creation rule list of sub-folders that would be affected.
	+ ISO week numbers are now supported in name & content templates.
+ New keyboard control and shortcuts:
	+ `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Up` opens the settings panel in the current pane. Pane settings can be navigated by the keyboard.
	+ The [[Feed Lens|Feed]], [[Cards Lens|Cards]], and [[List Lens|List Lenses]] can be navigated with the keyboard.
	+ The "Move to Left Note" `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Left` shortcut to move keyboard focus to [[The Sidebar]]. Pressing `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Right` while focus is in the sidebar will return focus to the leftmost pane.
+ List improvements:
	+ The `-` and `*` list characters are now treated as different kinds. Swapping between them in a list will propagate that change to all lower siblings.
	+ List glyphs to automatically change as you indent, progressing from alpha to numeric and `*` to `-`. This can be disabled in the note settings.
+ More file & embedding features:
	+ Link to specific [[Embedding#PDF Pages|PDF page numbers]] and times in audio & video files.
	+ Embedded PDF files now show the entire linked page.
	+ Added the option in the context menu to update an image from the clipboard.
	+ Added `.webp` image files to the image allow list.
+ Added display of link context on the [[Map View]] when available.
+ Sentence focus will highlight the previous sentence if the cursor is within trailing whitespace of a line. This leaves the last sentence highlighted when you haven't yet started a new one.
+ Changed word count mechanism to `/\S+/`, improving non-latin word counts.
+ Added support for drag-dropping files in the sidebar to root.
+ Made the floating "Create" button universal across the Folder, Feed, & List Lenses.
+ Added an option to base keyboard shortcuts on `keycode` values, keeping them in the same physical location as locals change.
+ Added support for unbalanced parentheses in markdown links when urls are wrapped in angle brackets.
+ Added a setting to disable auto-updates.
+ Updated to Electron 40 and Svelte 5.

- Fixed an issue where thousands of in-note-search results could cause dramatic performance issues by limiting the number of rendered annotations.
- Fixed a bug where queries that had wiki references after text filters (e.g. `Notes with 'test' and [[Test]]`) did not correctly filter data.
- Fixed a bug where $math$ required whitespace to the left of the opening character.
- Fixed a bug where wiki link autocomplete with aliases and headers was broken.
- Fixed a bug with [[Highlights#Emoji Highlights]] that incorrectly hid the last character.
- Fixed a long-standing bug where a window's "maximized" state was not recorded and restored.
- Fixed an issue where extra `Referer` header data present for embedding YouTube videos caused remote images to not load successfully.
- Fixed an issue where `content_id` (e.g. `#Header`) information on a link would be lost when a link is updated when renaming the target file.
- Fixed an issue where inline formatting could activate incorrectly. e.g. === will no longer trigger highlights.
- Fixed an issue where the text carat was hard to read in highlighted text.

New since alpha 6:
+ Added a new set of search buttons to the navigation bar that acts as a visual affordance to the [[Command Palette]].
+ Added a new full-text-search feature to the Command Palette. This is invoked with the `Cmd/Ctrl+Shift+F` shortcut. The "New Query" shortcut has been moved to `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Shift+F`.
+ Made the various Command Palette keyboard shortcuts switch command palette modes when the command palette is active.
- Stopped blocking some unicode characters from being inserted as an experimental fix for some complex languages.