Changes since version v0.3.2:
+ Added support for moving files and folders by dragging and dropping them in the sidebar.
+ Added support for opening links within the same panel with `Cmd/Ctrl+Shift+Click
+ Added support for opening local files and folders that are not part of the workspace via markdown links.
+ Added support for opening files and directories in Tangent via command line and drag & drop onto the application.
+ Added support for encoded URI links in local markdown links.
+ Added support for displaying change logs from any workspace. New changes will be (optionally) displayed when launching a new version for the first time.
+ Added the option to set the font for code.
+ Added the [[Notes#Smart Paragraph Breaks]] editing option. When enabled, pressing Enter while in a paragraph will insert an extra blank line. Deleting will automatically remove that blank line.
+ Updated Typewriter to v0.7.11
- Fixed an issue where pasting an image copied from a browser (and thus containing both text and image data) could cause both a markdown image using the image's url and a wiki link to the pasted embedded image. Tangent now just uses the embedded image.
- Fixed an issue where opening documentation didn't open the correct documentation page.
- Fixed a bug where missing workspace data could cause unexpected behavior.
- Fixed a regression where the the note font selection option wasn't working correctly.
- Fixed an issue where toggling inline formatting could affect formatting on the next line.
- Fixed a bug where clicking on backlinks resulted in new files being named incorrectly.