Select changes for v0.4.0:
+ Introduces [[Queries]] with the new [[Query Syntax]].
	* Open a new Query Pane with `Cmd/Ctrl+Shift+F`,
	* The results of queries can be visualized as cards or as a feed.
	* Rename queries to save them into your workspace.
	* Reference saved queries with `[[wiki links]]` within other queries!
+ Improved the Sidebar:
	* Files & Folders have new icons.
	* Parents of selected files have an indicator.
	* Added the name of the workspace to the top of the sidebar. Right click to open in your file browser.
+ Improved the [[Feed Lens]] and [[Cards Lens]]:
	* Added support for showing folders.
	* Added sorting support to the Cards Lens.
	* Added an option for showing the word count of notes in the Cards Lens.
+ Improved Link Interactions:
	* Added a "copy url" action to external links.
	* Made the middle mouse button open links, mirroring Ctrl/Cmd + left mouse button.
	* Added the option to open links to the left of the current pane with `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Click` or `Cmd/Ctrl+Alt+Enter`.
	* Markdown links inferred to point to files outside of the workspace now show up as "untracked" purple links. Added alert messages when trying to follow an untracked link fails.
	* Added support for directing the system to natively open workspace files Tangent cannot represent.
+ Added support for locking note headers to the top of the pane.
+ Improved sentence highlighting with significantly better end-of-sentence detection. Now other punctuation (!, ?), and dot.notation work as expected.
+ Added the ability to create a new file from the `Ctrl/Cmd+O` file search menu.
+ Added a setting that opens the [[Map View]] when the last item in a Thread is closed. This is enabled by default.
+ Added support for weekday and month replacement tokens in [[Creation Rules]].
+ Added basic RTL language support.
+ Added support for restoring workspace windows to their last opened location.
* Tweaked sorting for note search results so that notes with many more incoming links are prioritized above notes with fewer incoming links. Notes that have roughly the same amount of links (on a logarithmic scale) are sorted by date modified as normal.
- Fixed an issue where pasting text with newlines into titles broke saving for that file.
- Fixed an issue where pasting styled text into titles caused title to contain styled text.
- Fixed an issue where toggling bold/italic/etc at the end of a word with a collapsed selection placed the cursor inside of the resulting formatting characters rather than outside.