New to Beta:
+ Added support for [[Sessions]] with multiple [[Map View|Map Views]] and [[Thread History]].
+ Added support for embedded [[KaTeX Equations]] for LaTeX-based math and chemical equations, in both block & inline forms. For example:
$$
H = \frac{f^2}{Nc} + f
$$
+ Added support for [[Custom Styles|Custom CSS Styles]].
+ Added support for negation in [[Queries]] with the `not` keyword.
+ Added the ability for [[Code#Code Blocks|Code Blocks]] to expand beyond the normal width of a note.
+ Added a "Paste Without Formatting" option, bound to `Cmd/Ctrl+Shift+V` that pastes plaintext regardless of whatever HTML may be in the clipboard.
+ Added a `Cmd/Ctrl+\` shortcut for toggling inline code styling.

New since Alpha 14:
+ Added support for relative attachment paths for pasted images.
+ Added tooltips to various commands that were missing tooltips.
- Fixed an issue where immediately editing the title of a new note could cause selection & typing problems.
- Fixed an issue where toggling inline code did not show up in the [[Command Palette]] or in the menus.
- Fixed an issue where wiki link autocomplete did not always choose the shortest possible path.
- Fixed an issue where the commands that removed nodes from the [[Map View]] did not use undo groups.
- Fixed an issue where the commands that removed nodes from the [[Map View]] could be triggered when not on the map view. This restores core keyboard shortcuts like `Alt+Backspace` for deleting a word.
- Fixed an issue where the options to create new notes from [[Creation Rules]] showed up in the [[Command Palette]] with the shortcut `Cmd/Ctr+N`.