New since v0.7.x:
+ Added index caching. Tangent will cache workspace indexes and restore them on first load. This should speed up startup times for large workspaces.
+ Sped up index link resolution, reducing the time taken linking notes by ~50%.
+ Added the ability to click on nodes & threads within old Session Maps to add those nodes and threads to the current Session.
+ Added [[Unicode Autocomplete]] support for arrows and dashes.
+ Added access to the custom [[Dictionary]] so that mistakenly-added words can be expunged.
+ Added support for cancelling todo items with `[-]`.
	+ Added the ability to choose between all todo states by right clicking on a checkbox.
	+ Added query support for canceled todos.
	+ Added a query shorthand for all complete _or_ canceled todos, e.g. `Notes with closed todos`.
+ Made open queries refresh on file changes.
+ Added diacritic-insensitivity for filename searches.
+ Opening a code block will automatically create a matching closing line.
+ Added autocomplete for code block languages.
+ Added support for wrapping selected text in quotes, brackets, and other formatting characters when the appropriate keys are pressed.
+ Renamed "Paragraph" focus to a new "Line" focus mode, which better reflects the actual behavior.
+ Added a new "Paragraph" focus that highlights the current line and any adjacent non-empty lines or code blocks.

- Fixed an issue where [[KaTeX Equations]] were not loading their fonts and thus rendering incorrectly.
- Fixed an issue where toggling inline formatting from the end of a word incorrectly left the ending formatting character selected.
- Fixed an issue where the text cursor in code blocks in light mode was essentially invisible.
- Fixed an issue where file tree parsing errors could leave null nodes and cause downstream issues. Added logging for said errors.
- Fixed a bug where duplicate processing could scramble lists.
- Fixed a bug where the window title didn't update when a note was renamed.
- Fixed an issue where math blocks had black-on-black text in light mode.
- Fixed an issue where file tree parsing errors could leave null nodes and cause downstream issues. Added logging for said errors.