New Since v0.9.0-alpha.11:
+ Added support for unicode autocomplete in note titles.
+ Added an option on linux & windows to use the native titlebar. Defaults to on for linux, off for windows.
- Fixed an issue where you couldn't select inside of a selection in note titles.
- Fixed an issue where links with periods could create files with strange extensions.
- Replaced "Paste as Plaintext" with the native "Paste and Match Style", fixing a duplicate paste issue on Windows & Linux.
- Fixed an issue where the [[List Lens]] couldn't scroll.
- Fixed an issue where raw links would assume a trailing period was part of the link.
- Fixed an issue where toggling on italic, bold, or other inline formatting on an empty line didn't work.
- Fixed an issue where creating a new session by following links could drop current thread context.

New Since v0.8.x:
+ Added support for <span class="wow">HTML</span> syntax parsing.
+ Added support for inline formatting within link text.
+ Added support for [[Embedding]] & link previews. Raw links on their own line are automatically treated as "embed" links. Markdown embed links (i.e. image links) will also display link previews & embeds. Audio, video, and YouTube links are displayed in the note natively.
+ Added support for [[Line & Section Shifting|Shifting Sections]] with Alt+Shift+Up/Down on Windows & Linux and ⌃⌥+Up/Down on Mac.
+ Added an option to always use the full workspace path when autocompleting [[Wiki Links]].
+ Added wiki link previews using a new custom tooltip system.
+ Added support for selecting different code highlighting themes, with different options for block and inline (e.g. HTML) code in both light mode and dark mode.
+ Changed scrolling cards in the [[Cards Lens]] to require `alt` by default. This can be changed within settings.
+ Added a simple [[List Lens]] for folders & queries that displays files in a list. This lens is used automatically when displaying folders & queries in the [[Feed Lens]].
+ Added support for simple in-file search.
+ Added support for indenting headers, code blocks, math blocks, and block quotes.
+ Switched to using the computer name instead of `hostname` when identifying a machine in workspace data.
- Fixed several issues that could cause terrible performance in [[Queries]].
- Fixed an issue where renamed notes could have their old names retained in the saved session files.
- Fixed an issue where "portable" paths generated from Windows had backslashes in their paths.
- Fixed an issue where the [[Feed Lens]] wasn't correctly handling node reference comparison, leading to strange behavior when viewing [[Queries]] in the Feed Lens.