New since v0.8x:
+ Added support for link previews, with support for website previews, audio, video, and youtube links. Raw links on their own line are automatically previewed.
+ Added support for displaying <span class="wow">HTML</span> with syntax highlighting.
+ Hovering over wiki-links now show a preview of the note's contents.
+ Changed scrolling cards in the [[Cards Lens]] to require `alt` by default. This can be changed within settings.
+ Added support for [[Line & Section Shifting|Shifting Sections]] with Alt+Shift+Up/Down on Windows & Linux and ⌃⌥+Up/Down on Mac.
+ Added an option to follow links with unmodified left clicks.
+ Added an option to always autocomplete the full workspace path for [[Wiki Links]].
+ Added an option to control whether finished [[Todos]] are crossed out.
+ Added support for selecting different code highlighting themes.
+ Added support for searching within a single file.
+ Added support for indenting headers, code blocks, math blocks, and quotes.
+ Added support for unicode autocomplete in note titles.
+ Added the [[List Lens]] and greatly improved the [[Cards Lens|Card]] and [[Feed Lens|Feed]] lenses.
+ Switched to using the computer name instead of `hostname` when identifying a machine in workspace data.
+ Added an option on linux & windows to use the native titlebar. Defaults to on for linux, off for windows.
+ Added error & warning indicators for YAML parsing errors in [[Front Matter]].
+ Changed default [[Bold and Italics]] behavior so that underscores surrounded by text does not trigger formatting.
+ Updated Electron to v35.4.0; updated many other dependencies as well.
- Lots of bug fixes.

New since Beta 5:
- Fixed an issue where query editor selection could be lost.
- Fixed an issue where you couldn't open a new query from the Map.
- Fixed an issue where query results could come out of order.
- Fixed HTML parsing to only start on valid tag names.